HDDS-11630. Add Build from Maven guide (#100)
apache/ozone-site: docs/08-developer-guide/01-build/01-maven.md

:::

#### Common Maven Build Options

| Command                       | Description                                                                                                                                                             |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `-DskipTests=true`            | Skip all tests                                                                                                                                                          |
| `-Pdist`                      | This creates a tarball in `hadoop-ozone/dist/target` that contains all necessary files for deployment                                                                   |
| `-DskipRecon`                 | Skip building the Javascript frontend for Recon                                                                                                                         |

> | `-Pdist`                      | Enable the distribution profile to create deployment tarballs                                                                                                           |

Reviewer: `-Pdist` is duplicated

```suggestion
```

> | `-T 4`                        | Use 4 threads for parallel building (adjust number based on your CPU)                                                                                                   |
> | `-T 2C`                       | Use 2 threads per core for parallel building (adjust number based on your CPU)                                                                                          |

Reviewer: nit: I guess the benefit of using the per-core value is that it adapts to your CPU.

```suggestion
| `-T 4`                        | Use 4 threads for parallel building (adjust number based on your CPU)                                                                                                   |
| `-T 2C`                       | Use 2 threads per core for parallel building                                                                                          |
```

---
sidebar_label: Maven
---

# Building Ozone With Maven

- Cover basic Maven commands to build and run tests.
- Document all the Ozone specific Maven flags we use to speed up or skip parts of the build, and when they are useful.

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

This guide explains how to build Apache Ozone from source using Maven and prepare it for deployment.

## Prerequisites

> **TODO** : [HDDS-11625](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HDDS-11625) Finalize the version numbers of prerequisite packages

Reviewer 2: I think the existing Jira is enough to track this. We can commit the docs page free of TODOs.

    cd ozone
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="Tarball" label="Tarball">
    Use this option if you only want a released version of Ozone. Source code for Ozone releases can be obtained from the [download page](/download).
    ```bash
    tar xzf ozone-<version>-src.tar.gz
    cd ozone-<version>-src
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Build the Project

Apache Ozone uses [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/) as its build system. The build process compiles the source code, runs tests, and creates deployable artifacts. The project supports various build configurations to accommodate different development and deployment needs.

### Build Options

The build system offers several options to customize the build process according to your requirements

#### Basic Build with Tests

```bash
mvn clean package
```

This command will:

- Clean previous build artifacts
- Compile the source code
- Package the compiled code into JAR files
- Create a distribution in `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>`
- Run [unit](/docs/developer-guide/test/unit-tests) and [integration](/docs/developer-guide/test/integration-tests) tests during the build

:::note

> This command does not run acceptance tests.
> 
> Refer to the [acceptance tests](/docs/developer-guide/test/acceptance-tests) page for test execution instructions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This command does not run acceptance tests. Refer to the [acceptance tests](/docs/developer-guide/test/acceptance-tests) page for test execution instructions.
```

| `-DskipShade`                 | Skip shading. This saves a ton of time by skipping the `ozone-filesystem-hadoop3` fat jar build used by the client                                                      |
| `-Dmaven.artifact.threads=30` | Allow Maven to download 30 artifacts at once. The default value is 5. This could speed up the build process by a lot when the Maven cache was not previously populated. |
| `-Pnative`                    | Build native module(s). So far it only affects `hdds-rocks-native`                                                                                                      |

### Build Output

The build process creates several important artifacts:

- **Distribution Tarball**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>.tar.gz` (when using `-Pdist`)
- **Distribution Directory**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/`
- **Individual Module JARs**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/share/ozone/lib`

You can test the result of the compilation process by running a simple Ozone command which will display the Ozone version:

```bash
hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/bin/ozone version
```

## Next Steps

> Run the build by deploying the binary on either [bare metal](../../05-administrator-guide/01-installation/03-installing-binaries.md) or a [Docker cluster](../../08-developer-guide/02-run/02-docker-compose.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the build by deploying the binary on either [bare metal](../../05-administrator-guide/01-installation/03-installing-binaries.md) or a [Docker cluster](../../08-developer-guide/02-run/02-docker-compose.md).
```

---
sidebar_label: Maven
---

> <!-- cspell:words xzf Dskip Pdist installnpm installnpx installyarn -->

Reviewer 2: Spelling is now ignored in markdown code blocks so we can remove this

Author: Done

# Building Ozone With Maven

> **TODO:** File a subtask under [HDDS-9861](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HDDS-9861) and complete this page or section.

Reviewer 2: I think we are ready to remove the two TODOs here

Author: Done

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/apache/ozone.git
    cd ozone
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="Tarball" label="Tarball">
    Use this option if you only want a released version of Ozone. Source code for Ozone releases can be obtained from the [download page](/download).
    ```bash
    tar xzf ozone-<version>-src.tar.gz
    cd ozone-<version>-src
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Build the Project

Apache Ozone uses [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/) as its build system. The build process compiles the source code, runs tests, and creates deployable artifacts. The project supports various build configurations to accommodate different development and deployment needs.

### Build Options

The build system offers several options to customize the build process according to your requirements:

#### Basic Build

For a basic build that skips tests:

```bash
mvn clean package -DskipTests=true
```

This command will:

- Clean previous build artifacts
- Compile the source code
- Package the compiled code into JAR files
- Create a distribution in `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>`

#### Build with Tests

> To run unit tests during the build:

Reviewer 2: We should note that this skips acceptance tests. It only runs the JUnit based tests. We should also link to the unit, integration, and acceptance test pages of the dev guide here for more info on what this means.
```suggestion
To run unit and integration tests during the build:
```

Author: Done

```bash

> mvn clean install

Reviewer 2: Let's use `clean package` here to be consistent. Also I think we only need to call out the basic starting command `mvn clean package` here, and we can leave all optional flags defined in the table. We can make `skipTests` and `dist` the first rows in the table

Author: Done

```

#### Create Distribution Tarball

To create a distribution tarball for deployment:

```bash
mvn clean package -DskipTests=true -Pdist
```

This creates a tarball in `hadoop-ozone/dist/target` that contains all necessary files for deployment.

#### Common Maven Build Options

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `-DskipTests=true` | Skip all tests |
| `-DskipRecon` | Skip building the Javascript frontend for Recon |
| `-Pdist` | Enable the distribution profile to create deployment tarballs |
| `-T 4` | Use 4 threads for parallel building (adjust number based on your CPU) |
| `-T 2C` | Use 2 threads per core for parallel building (adjust number based on your CPU) |
| `-am -pl :<module-name>` | Build a specific module and its dependencies when run from the root of the project |

> | `-DskipShade` | Skip shading. This saves a ton of time by e.g. skipping the `ozone-filesystem-hadoop3` fat jar build |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `-DskipShade` | Skip shading. This saves a ton of time by skipping the `ozone-filesystem-hadoop3` fat jar build used by the client |
```

| `-Dmaven.artifact.threads=30` | Allow Maven to download 30 artifacts at once. The default value is 5. This could speed up the build process by a lot when the Maven cache was not previously populated. |
| `-Pnative` | Build native module(s). So far it only affects `hdds-rocks-native` |

### Build Output

The build process creates several important artifacts:

- **Distribution Tarball**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>.tar.gz` (when using `-Pdist`)
- **Distribution Directory**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/`
- **Individual Module JARs**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/share/ozone/lib`

You can test the result of the compilation process by running a simple Ozone command which will display the Ozone version:

```bash
hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/bin/ozone version
```

## Next Steps

> Run the build by deploying the binary on either a [machine](../../05-administrator-guide/01-installation/03-installing-binaries.md) or on a [Docker cluster](../../08-developer-guide/02-run/02-docker-compose.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the build by deploying the binary on either [bare metal](../../05-administrator-guide/01-installation/03-installing-binaries.md) or a [Docker cluster](../../08-developer-guide/02-run/02-docker-compose.md)
```

- Compile the source code
- Package the compiled code into JAR files
- Create a distribution in `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>`

#### Build with Tests

To run unit tests during the build:

```bash
mvn clean install
```

#### Create Distribution Tarball

To create a distribution tarball for deployment:

```bash
mvn clean install -DskipTests=true -Pdist
```

This creates a tarball in `hadoop-ozone/dist/target` that contains all necessary files for deployment.

#### Maven Build Options

Several Maven options are available to customize the build process:

Here's the conversion to a markdown table:

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `-DskipTests=true` | Skip all tests |
| `-Dskip.installnpm -Dskip.installnpx -Dskip.installyarn -Dskip.npm -Dskip.npx -Dskip.yarn` | Skip building the Javascript frontend for Recon |
| `-Pdist` | Enable the distribution profile to create deployment tarballs |
| `-T 4` | Use 4 threads for parallel building (adjust number based on your CPU) |
| `-T 2C` | Use 2 threads per core for parallel building (adjust number based on your CPU) |
| `-am -pl module-name` | Build a specific module and its dependencies |

> 

Reviewer 3: Here are a few others that might be useful:

```suggestion
| `-DskipShade` | Skip shading during build. This saves a ton of time by e.g. skipping the ozone-filesystem-hadoop3 fat jar build |
| `-Dmaven.artifact.threads=30` | Allow maven to download 30 artifacts in parallel. The default value is 5. This could speed up the build process by a lot when the maven cache was not previously populated. |
| `-Pnative` | Build native module(s). So far it only affects `hdds-rocks-native` |

```

- Cover basic Maven commands to build and run tests.
- Document all the Ozone specific Maven flags we use to speed up or skip parts of the build, and when they are useful.

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

This guide explains how to build Apache Ozone from source using Maven and prepare it for deployment.

## Prerequisites

**TODO** : [HDDS-11625](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HDDS-11625) Finalize the version numbers of prerequisite packages

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed on your build machine:

- Java 1.8 or higher
- Apache Maven 3.6.3 or higher
- Git (if building from source repository)

## Obtain the Source Code

You can build Apache Ozone either by cloning the source code from Git or by downloading the official source tarball.

Choose one of the following methods to get the source code:

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="Git" label="Git" default>
    Use this option to build any release, tag or commit of Ozone.
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/apache/ozone.git
    cd ozone
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="Tarball" label="Tarball">

>     Use this option if you only want the released version of Ozone.
>     <br/>Obtain the Ozone sources from the [download](/download) page.
>     <br/>Next, unpack the tarball

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Use this option if you only want a released version of Ozone. Source code for Ozone releases can be obtained from the [download page](/download).
```
Just a little more concise and IMO reads smoother without the line breaks.

    ```bash
    tar xzf ozone-<version>-src.tar.gz
    cd ozone-<version>-src
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Build the Project

> Apache Ozone uses Maven as its build system. The build process compiles the source code, runs tests, and creates deployable artifacts. The project supports various build configurations to accommodate different development and deployment needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apache Ozone uses [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/) as its build system. The build process compiles the source code, runs tests, and creates deployable artifacts. The project supports various build configurations to accommodate different development and deployment needs.
```

### Build Options

The build system offers several options to customize the build process according to your requirements:

#### Basic Build

For a basic build that skips tests:

```bash

> mvn clean install -DskipTests=true

Reviewer 2: I think we can change these commands back to `package` per [this discussion](https://github.com/apache/ozone-site/pull/100#discussion_r1830222607)

Author: Fixed

```

This command will:

- Clean previous build artifacts
- Compile the source code
- Package the compiled code into JAR files
- Create a distribution in `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>`

#### Build with Tests

To run unit tests during the build:

```bash
mvn clean install
```

#### Create Distribution Tarball

To create a distribution tarball for deployment:

```bash
mvn clean install -DskipTests=true -Pdist
```

This creates a tarball in `hadoop-ozone/dist/target` that contains all necessary files for deployment.

> #### Maven Build Options
> 
> Several Maven options are available to customize the build process:
> 
> Here's the conversion to a markdown table:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Common Maven Build Options
```

IMO the title explains it all. This is getting published as a website and all traces of markdown will be erased.

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `-DskipTests=true` | Skip all tests |

> | `-Dskip.installnpm -Dskip.installnpx -Dskip.installyarn -Dskip.npm -Dskip.npx -Dskip.yarn` | Skip building the Javascript frontend for Recon |

Reviewer 2: Let's remove this and just use the `-DskipRecon` option.

Author: Fixed

| `-Pdist` | Enable the distribution profile to create deployment tarballs |
| `-T 4` | Use 4 threads for parallel building (adjust number based on your CPU) |
| `-T 2C` | Use 2 threads per core for parallel building (adjust number based on your CPU) |

> | `-am -pl module-name` | Build a specific module and its dependencies |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `-am -pl :<module-name>` | Build a specific module and its dependencies when run from the root of the project |
```

> | `-DskipShade` | Skip shading. This saves a ton of time by e.g. skipping the ozone-filesystem-hadoop3 fat jar build |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `-DskipShade` | Skip shading. This saves a ton of time by e.g. skipping the ozone-filesystem-hadoop3 fat jar build |
| `-DskipRecon` | Skip Recon frontend build. This saves a ton of time by e.g. skipping the Recon frontend npm build |

```

Reviewer 2: e.g. usually means there are more examples. Is skipShade skipping anything else other than the fat jar? We should probably also specify that jar is only used on the client side.

> | `-DskipShade` | Skip shading. This saves a ton of time by e.g. skipping the ozone-filesystem-hadoop3 fat jar build |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `-DskipShade` | Skip shading. This saves a ton of time by e.g. skipping the `ozone-filesystem-hadoop3` fat jar build |
```

In addition to helping readability this tells the [markdownlint CI check](https://github.com/apache/ozone-site/actions/runs/12305256157/job/34344447125?pr=10047125?pr=100) it is ok for Ozone to be lowercase in this context.

> | `-Dmaven.artifact.threads=30` | Allow maven to download 30 artifacts at once. The default value is 5. This could speed up the build process by a lot when the maven cache was not previously populated. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `-Dmaven.artifact.threads=30` | Allow Maven to download 30 artifacts at once. The default value is 5. This could speed up the build process by a lot when the Maven cache was not previously populated. |
```

[CI](https://github.com/apache/ozone-site/actions/runs/12305256157/job/34344447125?pr=10047125?pr=100) correctly flagged the inconsistent capitalization of maven here.

| `-Pnative` | Build native module(s). So far it only affects `hdds-rocks-native` |

### Build Output

> You can test the result of the compilation process by running a simple Ozone command which will display the Ozone version
> 
> ```bash
> ./hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>-SNAPSHOT/bin/ozone version
> ```
> 
> The build process creates several important artifacts:
> 
> - **Distribution Tarball**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>.tar.gz` (when using `-Pdist`)
> - **Distribution Directory**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/`
> - **Individual Module JARs**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>-SNAPSHOT/share/ozone/lib`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The build process creates several important artifacts:

- **Distribution Tarball**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>.tar.gz` (when using `-Pdist`)
- **Distribution Directory**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/`
- **Individual Module JARs**: `hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/share/ozone/lib`

You can test the result of the compilation process by running a simple Ozone command which will display the Ozone version:

```bash
hadoop-ozone/dist/target/ozone-<version>/bin/ozone version
```

I think this order of presentation makes more sense.
- I removed `SNAPSHOT`, we can leave that as part of `<version>`. Not every build will be a snapshot build. 
- `./` is not technically required here since we are already providing a relative path to the executable.
